Welcome to the Life Church Podcast.
We are an Acts 2 42 community, a family on a mission to bring a life of Jesus to warranty.
We hope you're ready to hear what God has to say to you today through His Word and by His Spirit.
Morning everyone.
So I just wanted to kind of just say a couple of things before I start really.
So the first thing is that
It feels a bit different when you preach, and when you prepare it, you're preparing as though it's sort of any other Sunday, and in one sense it is any other Sunday, but on another sense, obviously with what's happening in the world, it feels more significant.
So it just feels a bit funny as I come to stand up and preach.
I'm kind of aware of the, you know, the difference in the atmosphere in some ways.
But everything that God tells us and everything that he reveals to us is true, whether it is, you know, whether it seems like nothing significant is going on around us or whether it seems like it is.
So I'm just going to preach it anyway.
And then the other thing I want to say is that a lot of what I say, I'm saying as though I am talking to someone who calls themselves a Christian.
And that's because really, that's the way that the letter of Romans is written.
It's written to believers, okay?
So that's the way that I'm talking to you as believers.
If you don't call yourself a believer,
Then what I would want you to hear from what I say today is that all of this is available to you right now if you want it.
And then the final thing that I'm going to say before I start is that I haven't really got any points.
Okay.
So I urge you not to wait for the point because it won't come because I haven't got three points or four points or five points.
okay and I know what it is to sit and to sort of you know drift off for a little bit and wait for that point to come and then tune in but it won't come so you've got to kind of tune in all the time I'm afraid okay because I'm just going to talk and then I'm going to stop basically alright so we have been looking at Paul's letter to the Romans and it's been a four-part series and we have
based each one on a verse from part of the letter to the Romans.
And I'm just gonna remind us now about what we've covered.
So we started with chapter three, verse 23, for all have sinned and full short of the glory of God.
And that is a reminder that none of us can make it on our own, that we all need a savior.
Then,
We had chapter five, verse eight, but God demonstrates his own love for us in this, while we were still sinners, Christ died for us.
And that is a reminder to us of who our Savior is, Christ our Lord, and it reminds us of the work of the cross.
And then last week, Catherine took us through chapter 10, verse nine,
If you declare with your mouth, Jesus is Lord and believe in your heart that God raised him from the dead, you will be saved.
And this reminds us how we have chosen or can choose to receive God's free offer of salvation and then that we can proclaim it with joy to others.
And today, our anchor verse is
chapter 10 verse 13, everyone who calls on the name of the Lord will be saved.
And from this, we are going to remind ourselves that the work of salvation is God's work, not ours, and that therefore we know that we can trust in it completely.
Now, if you have been here through all of the four weeks,
You might wonder why it is that we've taken the verses from sort of such far parts, such spread out parts of the Book of Romans.
So we've got our first verse in chapter three.
We've got our second verse in chapter five, and then we've got our third and fourth verses all the way in chapter 10.
And so what I thought I'd do is I'd just kind of explain to you briefly
how the book of Romans up to where we are up to kind of fits together.
So that it doesn't just feel like there are sort of four floating verses out there, and that therefore the book of Romans maybe does feel a little bit mysterious.
It's not that mysterious, though it is quite difficult to follow sometimes.
So that's what I'm gonna do.
What's going on here?
What's going on in between?
And now obviously I'm going to do it very briefly.
Can't do the whole book of Romans in 30 minutes, but I am going to do a little bit of a kind of a summary for us.
So if we can bring up the kind of the mountain picture, this is something that was produced for a book about Romans and a course about Romans.
And the writer, Andrew Oletton, he uses throughout this sort of
idea of going on a mountain climb to kind of take us through the Book of Romans.
I'm not going to use that, but I'm going to use this picture just to go through the summary for us.
So, in the first chapter down here where there's that little lump, we have a brief summary of the Gospel.
In the backdrop or against the backdrop of our sin, we have Paul saying, for I am not ashamed
of the gospel.
It is the power of God that brings salvation to everyone who believes.
So he sets out there, right at the beginning, what it's going to be about.
And then there's a little dip.
It's the pit of sin.
And that is chapters one to three of Romans.
Paul deals with the problem of sin.
And he is careful to point out that this is a problem for all of us.
This is a problem for Jews.
It's a problem for Gentiles.
We're all in the same boat.
And this is where we get the first verse that we dealt with in the first week.
So this is chapter three, verse 23, for all have sinned and fall short of the glory of God.
Now Paul doesn't then wait until chapter five to tell us what the answer is.
The very next verse, chapter three, verse 24 says, and our
and all are justified freely by his grace through the redemption that came by Christ Jesus.
And then the chapters three and four talk about this salvation that God has won for us.
Romans chapter five, which is where we had our second verse, but God demonstrates his love for us in this while we were still sinners, Christ died for us.
This chapter is about the
that we have now with God because of the salvation that Paul talks about in chapters 3 and 4.
And then in chapters 6 and 7, Paul deals with some sort of tricky questions that we might have from this position of freedom.
Since we are now free, should we go on sinning so that grace may abound?
Paul says no.
We are dead to sin.
Sin is no longer our master.
We still struggle with sin, but it's no longer our master.
And so he answers this question.
He says, who will rescue me from this body of death?
Straight away, there's this body of death, our sinfulness.
Straight away, he says, thanks be to God, who delivers me through Christ Jesus, our Lord.
And you're probably already beginning to pick up a pattern here of all of this.
It's God that is doing it, not us.
So Paul's laid this out for us.
The awe-inspiring truth that we have been rescued, we have been set free, we have been forgiven.
And he's battered away those daft questions.
Well, okay, so I'm free now, then.
Can I just go on sinning?
No.
That's not the point of being free.
We will still sin, but that's not the point.
And he's about up here to step as it were onto the mountaintop of the book of Romans in chapter eight.
We're having set that all out.
He's now able to just marvel, to look around at the view and marvel at what God has done for us.
that we are children of God, that we have the spirit of God living in us, and that we have assurance of salvation.
And then in Romans, this is where I'm going to stop with the summary.
In Romans 9 to 11, which is the little bit in the cloud there, he deals with some mysteries.
Okay, and the key one is the role of Israel.
So,
Israel's role was crucial.
They had the patriarchs.
They had the judges, the prophets, the kings.
They had the promises.
And through the line of Israel, they have the descent, the human descent of Jesus Christ, the Messiah.
He's writing to Jewish and Gentile believers in Rome.
Now, some of the Jewish believers are struggling with what
the role of their traditions and the rules are for them.
And some of the Gentile believers are struggling with what the role of the Jews are now.
Have they replaced the Jews or are they supposed to replace them as God's people?
And this in this context is where we get our verse for today, which is everyone who calls on the name of the Lord will be saved.
You see Paul is saying, Jews, everyone who calls on the name of the Lord will be saved.
Gentiles, everyone who calls on the name of the Lord will be saved.
It calls back to the salvation and the peace chapters before, because it's God's work, not ours, that by believing in Jesus, we are saved.
But it calls back even further than that.
It calls back to the Old Testament.
This is a direct quote from Joel chapter 2, I think, verse 32, where it says, everyone who calls on the name of the Lord will be saved.
What is Paul showing by calling right back to the Old Testament with this verse?
He's reminding us that it is God's work
Not just that it is God's work, but it was His plan from the beginning.
In the Old Testament, it's there to see everyone who calls on the name of the Lord will be saved.
It was always the plan for Jesus to come.
And if you looked, you could see it there in the Book of Joel and all through the Old Testament that it was always the plan.
It was always God's work and there hasn't been a change.
It isn't a strange new teaching.
It is the fulfillment of everything that came before.
So this is where we are now somewhere around the top of the mountain.
That is where we are going to be reflecting and thinking today.
We're going to let it sink in that it is God's work, not ours.
the three previous sermons set out what salvation is, something that we cannot achieve for ourselves, we were utterly lost, achieved by Jesus sacrificing himself for us and offering us salvation freely and received by us when we say yes to him.
So we are gonna dwell on parts of Romans chapter eight that help us to grasp
just how safe and secure and incredible our position is simply by believing and trusting in Jesus and his work of salvation rather than trying to add anything to it with our own work so that we can grasp and live from a position of assurance of security and not from fear.
And this is about what anchors us, what anchors our Christian experience of life here and now, and also about the promise of eternity.
We are always, as it were, being called to lift our eyes from ourselves to the one who saved us.
Many of the worship songs that we sing do this, and I'm just gonna say some, read out to you some words from some of the worship songs that I love, just to show you how they are calling us, reminding us this is about Jesus and what he has done, not about us.
In Christ alone, my hope is found.
He is my light, my strength, my song, this cornerstone, this solid ground,
firm through the fiercest drought and storm.
My hope is built on nothing less than Jesus' blood and righteousness.
I dare not trust the sweetest frame, but holy trust in Jesus' name.
I will not boast in anything, no gifts, no power, no wisdom, but I will boast in Jesus Christ, his death and resurrection.
Why should I gain from his reward?
I cannot give an answer.
But this I know with all my heart, his wounds have paid my ransom.
Our assurance is not found in ourself and in our performance, just as our salvation is not found in ourself, but it is found in the finished work of the one who saved us.
Everyone who calls on the name of the Lord will be saved.
Just think about what that says.
That says everyone.
Not those who are good enough, or those who have met certain requirements, everyone.
Who calls, who calls out to the Lord to be saved.
Remember when Jesus talked about the kingdom of God being received like the little children.
Children now have to call out to be saved.
Help me.
That is what we're talking about here, not some great understanding.
Just help me, save me.
will be saved."
That is an absolute statement.
It doesn't say might be saved.
It doesn't say will be saved if you do this and this and this.
I said before that here at the top of this mountain, so to speak, in Romans 8, Paul is marveling at what it means to be at peace with God.
to have been saved by Christ, his sacrifice on the cross, his resurrection, his ascension, so that he is right now interceding for us as our high priest.
So that is what we're going to do.
And I believe the Holy Spirit inspired Paul to write these words for our encouragement to remind us of who we are in Christ and to assure us of our position in him.
Paul has a phrase that he uses regularly, which is in Christ.
Meaning that we are belonging to Christ.
We are his, we are in him.
We're brought into his death and into his resurrection.
We share in his righteousness.
We have his privileges.
And we're carrying his spirit, the Holy Spirit in us.
Remember, this is something that God has done.
We are not in Christ because we proved ourselves worthy and we're not kicked out of Christ because we fail.
The one who saved us is the one who by his righteousness, his faithfulness and his power keeps hold of us.
The mighty hand of God will not let us go.
So I'm gonna work through briefly, or maybe it's not that briefly.
I'm gonna work through some verses from Romans chapter eight.
If you wanna have your Bible open at that chapter, that's fine.
The verses that I focus on will be on the screen as I go through them if you manage that.
So right at the beginning of Romans chapter eight, we have our first wonderful encouragement for those of us who are in Christ Jesus.
Therefore,
There is now no condemnation for those who are in Christ Jesus.
We do not stand condemned.
And why is that the next verse?
Because through Christ Jesus, the law of the Spirit who gives life has set you free from the law of sin and death.
When Paul talks about the law of sin and death, theologians interpret that as being a description of just the way the world works outside of Jesus Christ.
Paul talks elsewhere as of the wages of sin being death.
It's just the natural consequence of sin.
It's the way the world works.
That is the law of sin and death.
But through Christ Jesus, the law of the Spirit who gives life has set you free from that reality.
You are in a new reality, one of life and freedom, not sin and death.
We are a people who carry the Spirit of God, the Holy Spirit.
And it is a testament to what this new reality that we live in, where we are not slave to sin.
doesn't have that hold on us.
The consequence of sin, death is no longer our consequence.
We are under the rule of the Spirit who gives life.
Who did this?
How was it accomplished?
This life, this fullness of life.
Remember Christ came that we might have life in all its fullness.
How was it achieved?
The next verse.
For what the law was powerless to do, that's the law of Moses.
For what the law was powerless to do, because it was weakened by the flesh, that's our sinfulness.
God did by sending his own son in the likeness of sinful flesh as a sin offering.
God did it.
God did.
What was impossible any other way because of our sinfulness?
God did by sending his son in the likeness of sinful flesh because he was without sin.
As an offering for us, he stood in our place.
We are not condemned because of what God did.
Paul goes on to talk about the spirit that we have.
being the same spirit that raised Christ from the dead.
Think of the power.
That is the spirit that we have.
We have resurrection power in us.
And he talks about this new obligation that we have in life, this new purpose to live according to that spirit and that the spirit leads us and guides us.
Suddenly we are marveling at the fact that we who were once sinful and separated from God in our sin through no work of our own, but just the free gift received in faith now have God living in us.
If that is not a testament to a new reality,
God who cannot abide sin is living in us.
That tells you all you need to know.
If he'd chosen and is able to live in us by his spirit, we are free.
Now, this is God residing now, not at the distance, not in a physical temple, but in us, his people.
so that we now are His temple where God resides on earth.
And this is meant to comfort us.
This is meant to give us confidence.
This is meant to assure us that God has chosen to make His home in us.
It goes on to say, for those who are led by the spirits of God are the children of God.
So now Paul is marveling at the fact that we
Our God's children, in this new reality, we are not slaves, we are children.
As it says in John chapter one, to those who did receive him, to those who believed in his name, he gave the right to become children of God.
It was on to say, the spirit you have received does not make you slaves so that you live in fear again.
but the spirit you have received has brought about your adoption to sonship.
That very same spirit that raised Jesus from the dead that lives in us is a spirit of sonship, not of fear, not of slavery.
We don't come to God fearing who we are, our position before him.
We approach him boldly as children,
We approach the throne of grace boldly because of what God has done, not what we can do.
Paul talked earlier in the chapter about the spirit helping us in our weakness.
But now here he says, and by him, this is the spirit, we cry Abba Father.
The spirit himself testifies with our spirit that we are God's children.
This is a strange phrase, but what it means is this.
The Holy Spirit assures us that we are God's children by drawing out of us prayer to God.
So when we come to pray to God as our Father, and that's not about the words that we use, it doesn't mean that it's only true if we say the word Father, but when we pray to our God as our Father,
That is the spirit that is calling us to do that.
It's as though the spirit is saying to you, yes, pray to your father.
He is your father.
You are his son.
You are his daughter.
He is testifying to the truth in that very prayer, in that very moment.
You are a son and daughter.
He's saying to us that the father is our father.
We are in the family.
Now Paul goes on to talk about suffering.
I'm not going to talk about that in detail because it's a preacher, a series of preachers in itself.
But this is what he says in summary in short.
He says that our suffering is not worth comparing to the glory that is going to be revealed in us.
And he says that when we suffer, it doesn't mean that God is displeased with us or that he's distant from us.
Christ suffered.
And at the end he concludes, he says, and we know that in all things God works for the good of those who love him, who were called according to his purpose.
So having talked about these things and having talked about being called, about being justified before God, about being glorified,
Scripture then says these words.
What then shall we say in response to these things?
Just recap, these are the things that it's saying that about.
What then shall we say in response to these things that there is no condemnation for us, that we have the Holy Spirit living in us, that we are children, not slaves, that the Spirit
Testifies to this, tells us it's true that we are God's children, that God is working all things for our good, and that we are being conformed to the image of the Son of Jesus.
What then shall we say in response to these things?
If God is for us, who can be against us?
He who did not spare his own son, but gave him up for us all.
How will he not also, along with him, graciously give us all things?
If God is for us, who can be against us?
Can the leaders of Iran?
Did you hear the second bit?
He who did not spare his own son, but gave him up for us all.
How will he not also, along with him, graciously give us all things?
Everything that we need for our improvement, everything that we need to be conformed to the son, is God going to hold it back from us?
He gave us his son.
Is he going to hold anything back from us?
We are the forgiven.
free children of God.
He is for us who can be against us.
It goes on to say, who will bring any charge against those whom God has chosen?
It is God who justifies.
Who then is the one who condemns?
No one.
We have here the image of a courtroom or of a king and his court.
If the creator and ruler of the universe of everything has said you are justified, you are forgiven, who can argue with that?
Who can condemn us?
If we had worked for it, if we had made that claim that we're all right, that we're righteous, then someone could
argue with us, someone could dispute it, someone could condemn us.
But if God has said it, who can argue with him?
The next verse, Christ Jesus who died.
More than that, who was raised to life is at the right hand of God and is also interceding for us.
We have the spirit interceding for us.
We have Christ Jesus raised from the dead, interceding from us.
So we've gone from the courtroom, from the ruler, who has declared us righteous, to our great high priest, who is interceding for us every moment of every day that we live, interceding for us before the Father.
Who shall separate us from the love of Christ?
Shall trouble or hardship or persecution or famine or nakedness or danger or sword?
Now in all these things we are more than conquerors through him who loved us.
Some
Translations say we are super-conquerous.
You see those list of things.
They can't hope to separate us from the love of Christ.
Danger, sword, persecution, famine, nakedness, trouble, hardship.
They can't separate us from the love of Christ.
We are super-conquerous through Him who loved us.
Is this enough to encourage us to give us assurance in God's work?
Shall we still look to ourselves, to our own righteousness, to our own works?
Should we believe any lies of the enemy?
We are more than conquerors through Him who loved us.
If you find yourself doubting your position before God, your eternity with him.
If the enemy is lying to you and trying to condemn you, remember these words, the last words of Romans 8.
For I am convinced that neither death nor life, neither angels nor demons,
Neither the present nor the future nor any powers.
Neither height nor depth nor anything else in all creation.
We'll be able to separate us from the love of God in Christ Jesus our Lord.
For I am convinced that neither death nor life, neither angels nor demons,
Neither the present nor the future, nor any powers, neither height nor depth nor anything else in all creation will be able to separate us from the love of God in Christ Jesus, our Lord.
You see, we know what we have been saved from, slavery to sin, the wages of sin which are death.
But from a place
of security, we can marvel with joy about what we have been saved to.
Adoption as sons and daughters of the Most High God, fellowship with one another.
To be a people who have the Holy Spirit in them, comforting, guiding, correcting.
But in these last few verses, we are reminded that it is God's perfect love for us.
that is our new reality, that is our eternity.
Perfect love, perfectly known, perfectly loved.
A love that keeps us, sustains us, surrounds us.
It makes our eternity not just a relief, but a joy, eternally satisfying.
And confident in our salvation, we go on with the mindset that
Okay, God, you've got more for me.
What is it?
It's good.
What good things do you have in store for me?
This isn't about giving us license to do nothing or to just sit placidly in what Christ has done for us.
This is about where we start from.
This is about the position we live out of
One of assurance, not fear.
One of trusting God, not ourselves.
And from that place, living to bring glory to the one who saved us.
Lord, I pray that you would open the eyes of our hearts, that we would know the love that you have for us, that we would know your love like strong arms holding us from now until eternity.
that we would have confidence, security, and assurance in your work in what you have done.
And that we would be a people that speak life to those around us.
To your glory, in Jesus' name, I pray.
Amen.
We've come to the end of this week's message.
We hope you've been impacted and inspired.
Please keep up to date with everything that's happening by visiting our website at www.livechurchdorrington.com.